# Telecon w/ NOAA

3 November 2016, 10AM PDT

__Participants:__ Aaron Marburg (APL), Chris Beaverson (NOAA),
Kasey Kantwell (NOAA),
Susan Gottfried (NOAA),
...


Chance to introduce Aaron to NOAA team.  Kasey as expedition specialist has good knowledge of D2 dives, Susan as data specialist @ Stennis is POC for retrieving data.

Kasey had already pointed Aaron to 2016 [Marianas (EX1605)](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1605/welcome.html) and [Wake Island / PRIMNM (EX1606)](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1606/welcome.html) data sets.   As recent data, interest is fresh, and the data recording techniques are most well established.

Aaron discussed what he was looking for.   Lowest hanging fruit will have be of strong 3D objects, with relief and/or visual texture/color change.  This points  to the archeaological artifacts: the [B-29](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1605/logs/jul9/welcome.html) at Marianas, and the [Japanese freighter](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1606/logs/aug14/welcome.html) at Wake.  Geologically, the [pillow lavas and 30-m vent](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1605/logs/may2/welcome.html) in the Mariana back-arc are of interest.   Balance between targets with a chance of success versus maintaining science diversity (how to include biologists?).  Preference for video with lots of time on scene, many views.    They do not frequently do lawn-mower surveys, have some data of downward-looking camera (Gulf of Mexico shipwrecks 2012, Mid-Cayman Rise 2011?) but this data would pre-date D2.  Data quality issues?

Often they explore geology by travelling upslope, in many cases they "meander" upslope, so this would provide the lateral motion.   Aaron discusses challenges of dealing with science/ROV-driven data collection with pan/tilt/zoom versus data designed for mosaicking.

Susan:   Data is stored in Prores 1080i 145MB/s and/or 720.   Most end-to-end data is stored as 720.  Over time, more Prores is being stored, often in 5 minute chunks which are being published through the [NOAA video portal](http://www.nodc.noaa.gov/oer/video/).

Aaron could benefit from other vehicle metadata, e.g. IMU logs.   This would allow more robust estimation of vehicle attitude and changes.  Also PTZ positions or commands.  This data is not being recorded.   Vehicle tracks via USBL are being stored for macro-scale geolocation.

Making changes to data acquisition procedures will be very slow process, expect year-ish lead time, driven by ability to suggest and test new SOPs in the dry seasons.

Aaron could also use data from Seirios for context and also to independently estimate motion of D2.  This is a harder problem, not likely to be addressed immediately.

Kasey agrees that the B29 data is a great place to start, as well as vent.   Main site is B29 wing although they also surveyed and found other debris field 100, 50 meteres away.  Might be chance for site-level reconstruction.   Also [Chamorro](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1605/logs/jun25/welcome.html) and the Painted Canyon [here @ June 21, 2016](http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/okeanos/explorations/ex1605/dailyupdates/dailyupdates.html).

Getting science interests:   strong interest in metric measurements from maritime archaeologists, biologists.  Deep sea coral communities?   

Existing imaging is like Google Earth (flat mosaic) or [Catlin Seaview](https://plus.google.com/+CatlinSeaviewSurvey) ... more like Streetview where you travel from "bubble to bubble".   True 3D model would be incredible.

Chris -- mention connection to Liz Clarke re image processing.

Kasey will provide dive information on identifiers which will speed retrieval.   All data is available except B29 data which is still being reviewed by DoD:   may contain human remains, Army sensitivities.   NOAA to provide information / NDA to Aaron re heritage sites.

Chris:  Invite Aaron to brown bag/seminar in MD.  Also think about publicity possibilities.
